Post for contributor call (#447)
haiku/website: content/news/2020-11-13-release-plans-and-call-for-contrib.md

- The Haiku experience does not suffer from fragmentation. All Haiku components are maintained in a single codebase, without having to rely on other teams for core system components. No flame wars between Z12 and Roadcountry supporters, or Leprechauns and Krusaders. We don't curse on the mailing lists as well.
- Haiku is a GUI-first operating system, unlike most other FOSS systems. The Terminal is still a first-class citizen after booting the system, right there waiting for you.
- Haiku is the only operating system that completely stays true to the [desktop metaphor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desktop_metaphor). Tracker is the only remaining mainstream spatial desktop manager. If you are looking for an desktop experience close to the Classic Mac OS, Haiku is your guy.
- Haiku offers a unique solution for package management, which most Linux distributions seem to suffer from. All Haiku packages are mountable disk images, therefore they do not litter your system with copied files everywhere. Updating and recovering the system is as easy as replacing a single file.

> - You might find it surprising that we respect the "everything-is-a-file" concept more than other \*nixes.

Reviewer: I'm surprised by this statement. Source?

Author: Which one?

Reviewer: this one: "we respect the "everything-is-a-file" concept more than other \*nixes"

Author: It's a nod to hosting e-mails, bookmarks, contacts etc. as files.

Reviewer: The concept is accurately: Everything is a file descriptor. Referring to it can be a misunderstanding imo

Author: Removed it.

type = "news"
title = "R1 Status Update and Call for Contributors"
author = "bitigchi"
date = "2020-11-13 13:00:00+03:00"
tags = ["r1"]

> After nearly 20 years of development, Haiku is very close to its first release. We need your help to make it happen. Here's a status update for R1, and latest project news.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't qualify more than 600 tickets as "very close"

Author: IIRC, close to 1000 tickets have been resolved between beta1 and beta2, in a time period of 1.5~ years. Comparing to that, it sounds doable and close enough (not very close, though, I'll edit the "very" part).

Reviewer 2: Active tickets in early 2017: about 2000 for R1 + 1000 for Unscheduled
Active tickets in early 2019: about 1300 for R1 + 1500 for Unscheduled

The total is +200 tickets over two years. But there has been efforts to triage things and move some to "unscheduled". I would'nt say we have solved 1000 tickets between beta1 and beta2. We have made a lot of triaging effort and the remaining tickets are things that actually need work.

Source: http://web.archive.org/web/20190426233529/https://dev.haiku-os.org/roadmap vs http://web.archive.org/web/20170201165934/https://dev.haiku-os.org/roadmap

Author: I see. I [checked](https://dev.haiku-os.org/query?status=closed&milestone=%5ER1%2Fbeta2&col=id&col=summary&col=status&col=milestone&col=type&col=priority&col=component&order=priority) the beta2 milestone for this, but triaging etc. sounds reasonable.

Reviewer 2: There's also the fact that people keep opening new tickets, so sometimes it feels like we're going backwards on this. Unfortunately Trac doesn't really provide us with good metrics. But now with beta3 we're trying to use the milestones more accurately and we should get a better idea going forward.

In any case, it's a lot of work still to be done, and the ticket number doesn't necessarily reflect this (there are a lot of regressions that get fixed very quickly, for example, but the old, big, complex tickets remain and accumulate).

And well, "we're never been this close" always applies :)
I guess we have reached the point where "90% of the work is done, now let's start on the remaining 90%" or something. All the boring work that no one wants to do gets postponed to the end, and at some point someone has to dig into it.

> After nearly 20 years of development, Haiku is close to its first stable release, namely R1. We need your help to make it happen. Here's a status update for R1, and latest project news.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After nearly 20 years of development, Haiku is close to its first stable release, namely R1. We need your help to make it happen. Here's a status update for R1 and the latest project news.
```

## Release Plans

> We are planning to release Beta3 sometime next year, hopefully followed by the stable release, R1. We currently have [31](https://dev.haiku-os.org/query?status=assigned&status=in-progress&status=reopened&status=new&group=status&milestone=R1%2Fbeta3) tickets left for Beta 3, and [688](https://dev.haiku-os.org/query?status=assigned&status=in-progress&status=reopened&status=new&group=status&milestone=R1) tickets waiting to be resolved. A big portion of these tickets are bug fixes that are aimed towards the general stability of the system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are planning to release Beta 3 sometime next year, hopefully followed by the stable release, R1. We currently have [31](https://dev.haiku-os.org/query?status=assigned&status=in-progress&status=reopened&status=new&group=status&milestone=R1%2Fbeta3) tickets left for Beta 3, and [688](https://dev.haiku-os.org/query?status=assigned&status=in-progress&status=reopened&status=new&group=status&milestone=R1) tickets waiting to be resolved. A big portion of these tickets are bug fixes that are aimed towards the general stability of the system.
```

> Haiku project is by no means a small project, it is a full operating system nonetheless. Maintaining a full-stack operating system is a huge work, and needs more than a handful of developers. Recently, some of our core developers have announced that they will either limit their Haiku-time significantly due to other personal obligations or will take a break from the project. This jeopardizes the possibility of putting a stable release out in a viable timeframe.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Haiku project is by no means a small project, it is a full operating system after all. Maintaining a full-stack operating system is a huge amount of work, and needs more than a handful of developers. Recently, some of our core developers have announced that they will either limit their Haiku-time significantly due to other personal obligations or will take a break from the project. This jeopardizes the possibility of putting a stable release out in a viable timeframe.
```

> The Haiku project is by no means a small project, it is a full operating system after all. Maintaining a full-stack operating system is a huge amount of work, and needs more than a handful of developers. Recently, some of our core developers have announced that they will either limit their Haiku-time significantly due to other personal obligations or will take a break from the project. This jeopardizes the possibility of putting a stable release out in a viable timeframe.

Reviewer 4: Again, there were no announcements. It would be better simply to cite the commit statistics, as it indeed appears I am not the only person to have scaled back.

Reviewer 2: I agree, please remove this paragraph. People contribute to Haiku depending on their free time and motivation, and no one is essential. One or two developers leaving the project or scaling back does not jeopardize anything. You are putting pressure on people who don't need it, and the effect is very negative (you may have noticed that I have been mostly inactive for about two months, mainly because I don't like this climate and prefer to work on other things as long as Haiku feels like "oh no we need to ship a release, go back to work now!").

I appreciate your motivation and efforts to get things moving, but I perceive this kind of statement as an attack on the existing developers and quite counterproductive if your goal is to get (and keep) people involved.

Author: @pulkomandy, I am not putting pressure on anyone, this is about getting new people to get things moving. Like it or not, this is the current situation, and if you feel attacked, that's an issue on your side. Why would it bother you if you are only tinkering with Haiku on your free time, and not caring about a release (your words). If you don't like the climate, you can always turn off your notifications and work on Haiku as you please. Don't check the forums, don't check the IRC, don't check the mailing list. This is totally under your control. But you can't change what it really is, because these are things you'll hear people talking.

Again, this paragraph is not about you. But by reflecting your personal feelings here, you are inadvertently dramatising the subject. Please mind your business, and do not block people that are trying to move things forward.

@waddlesplash, is it okay for you if I just cite the commit numbers without providing actual stats, or you think it's necessary to provide some sort of actual number? I'd say the former would be okay, if not, I'd love some help with numbers.

Reviewer 2: You use words like "jeopardizing" and "not viable" and I'm the one dramatizing.

Reviewer 4: @bitigchi, are you are literally suggesting that if @pulkomandy does not like the climate you are creating (or, at least, trying to create) the solution is for him to ... leave the project?!

To be completely honest, I share many of Adrien's sentiments here. Your devotion to getting more contributors and otherwise improving Haiku is admirable; your push to get people to focus on what you find important or otherwise set deadlines, etc. is not, and indeed it is not helping. I have commented on this obliquely before, but if you are going to go so far as to literally suggest Adrien more or less leave the project, while saying things like "jeopardizes" or "viable timeframe", then I am going to make a much stronger statement than I have before:

Haiku is not your personal project, and you are not our boss. Either stop trying to boss people around, or we will be forced to sanction you. Again, your desire to see Haiku succeed on a grand scale is admirable, and we naturally share it. But the methods you are trying to use to get there are pretty problematic.

Reviewer: This paragraph won't get us more developers. To me it looks like "we make plans for a release, knowing we don't have the people to do the work".

Author: @waddlesplash, I am not suggesting anyone to leave the project. Why would you get such a meaning when we are trying to get more contributors here? Do you care to explain? You can feel free to sanction me (like I care), but it's kind of interesting that you feel the need to be this defensive when you're not actively contributing to the project.

@pulkomandy, @waddlesplash, let's review the sentence in question:

> This jeopardizes the possibility of putting a stable release out in a viable timeframe.

I do not see what's the problem here. When the top two committer of the project "scales back" their time, it literally puts the project at risk, the risk of putting a release out in a "viable" timeframe. What's viable? 5 years? 10 years? I do not think so.

Reviewer 2: > I am not suggesting anyone to leave the project.

You are suggesting that I stay away from the forums, IRC and mailing lists (and I guess you forgot comments on pul lrequests), which means I would not be participating in the project, but writing code on my own. So, yes, you did just that.
Haiku is not just about writing code and dropping it in the git repo, an important part of it is discussing what we're doing, sharing knowledge and ideas, deciding what to do, etc. Which is the part I value most (above shipping releases).

Also, Waddlesplash did say "more or less leave" and you are ignoring that nuance.

> When the top two committer of the project "scales back" their time, it literally puts the project at risk

It doesn't, as we have explained to you multiple times, the project is organized in such a way that people can come and go as they want (or, in fact, as they can), without putting the project at risk. It will just be less contributions from two developers, and more contributions from others (new or existing). Or maybe a few months of slower progress. People have been joining nad leaving Haiku for the last 20 years and I don't think it would be any different this time.

> What's viable? 5 years? 10 years? I do not think so.

That's bad news, because we are already 20 years in and still no release. We should have given up in 2006 then.

Reviewer 4: Haiku has had periods of lots of activity and periods of less. Where other "hobbyist OS" projects have come and gone, we continue chugging along. I think we still have a _raison d'etre_, and insofar as there are people who share that, we will continue to progress, however slowly. So in that sense, if we continue at the pace we are at, we will eventually get somewhere, especially as consumer hardware "slows down" in terms of how it advances (it has been over a decade, and XHCI is still the USB controller standard, despite plenty of changes to USB since then, etc.) and it becomes much, much easier to "keep up".

It is very much worth noting, however, that it has never been part of Haiku's culture to "cut corners, get done quickly." We plod along, deliberating every major step of the way, pick what we think is the best solution, and then we implement it. That takes time, to be sure, but that is fundamentally what makes Haiku itself. That is why there are so many neat things, some of which are referenced in this very blog post, that we can be proud of: the package manager, the holistic system design, etc. etc. etc. Trying to pressure a cut-corners-and-get-done approach would be going against the very ethos that has gotten Haiku this far, and I think that is why @pulkomandy, @korli, myself, and many others have pushed so hard against it.

Again: Trying to attract new contributors is very good. But doing it for the wrong reasons or with the wrong intent is not good.

> The Haiku project is by no means a small project, it is a full operating system after all. Maintaining a full-stack operating system is a huge amount of work, and needs more than a handful of developers. Recently, some of our core developers have announced that they will either limit their Haiku-time significantly due to other personal obligations or will take a break from the project. This jeopardizes the possibility of putting a stable release out in a viable timeframe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Haiku project is by no means a small project, it is a full operating system after all. Maintaining a full-stack operating system is a huge amount of work, and needs more than a handful of developers. From our experience from past releases, we know that being a small team can make release timeframe projections hazardous.
```

> Haiku project is by no means a small project, it is a full operating system nonetheless. Maintaining a full-stack operating system is a huge work, and needs more than a handful of developers. Recently, one of our core developers, waddlesplash has recently announced his leave from the project due to personal reasons. waddlesplash has contributed to Haiku Project close to a decade, and has been the top contributor for 2017, 2018, and 2019. He has contributed invaluable additions to the Haiku Project, like the NVME driver, and USB3 support, with countless bug fixes and improvements on numerous Haiku components.

Reviewer 4: I did not announce it; I commented that I would be significantly scaling things back (i.e. as I already have.) I am still around and paying attention to things, and contributing occasionally. Please do not include me in this post.

Author: Thanks, I'll edit accordingly.

> **With such breaks and the prolonged absence of the other core developers, currently we do not have the enough developer power to release R1. More beta releases are always possible, but without a stable release, Haiku will never have the chance to become a viable alternative for desktop users.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**With such breaks and the prolonged absence of the other core developers, currently we do not have  enough developer power to release R1. More beta releases are always possible, but without a stable release, Haiku will never have the chance to become a viable alternative for desktop users.**
```

Author: Double space.

> Making Haiku something more than an enthusiast operating system is not possible without your help.

Reviewer 2: Do you plan to pay for people? Because if you don't, you are only attracting more people enthusiast enough to work for free. And that will make it a larger enthusiast operating system.

Author: This is not constructive criticism, it's sheer cynicism. Paying people is not the issue. Haiku project needs people motivated enough to put a release out. It's obvious that the current developers have lost their motivation to fix bugs, and frankly, that's okay. We just need to get fresh blood to put the project back on track.

Reviewer 2: I don't see how else you can motivate people to fix these 688 bugs. Good luck.

Reviewer: "more than an enthusiast operating system" is subjective. Please be more neutral, for instance: "Achieving a stable release of Haiku is not .."

Author: Done.

## Call for Developers

> If you are a C++ developer, we want you to help us in developing and maintaining Haiku. Our priority is to release R1, therefore we need urgent support in fixing R1 milestone bugs. Other than that, improvements on [these areas](https://www.haiku-os.org/community/getting-involved/developing) are necessary to provide a stable and usable user experience for Haiku users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are a C++ developer, we need you to help us in developing and maintaining Haiku. Our priority is to release R1, therefore we need urgent support in fixing R1 milestone bugs. Other than that, improvements in [these areas](https://www.haiku-os.org/community/getting-involved/developing) are necessary to provide a stable OS and a nice user experience for its users.
```

> If you are a C++ developer, we want you to help us in developing and maintaining Haiku. Our priority is to release R1, therefore we need urgent support in fixing R1 milestone bugs. Other than that, improvements on [these areas](https://www.haiku-os.org/community/getting-involved/developing) are necessary to provide a stable and usable user experience for Haiku users.

Reviewer 2: Who is "our"? What is "urgent" and why is it (tickets opened 10 years ago are suddenly urgent)?

Author: Because the tickets are blocking the release?

"Our" is the community that wants the release out I think?

## Why should I contribute to Haiku?

- Haiku is open source, and licensed with a permissive license (MIT).

> - Haiku is inspired by BeOS, which is highly praised as an operating system; now, and back in the day.

Reviewer 2: It was somewhat praised, but now it's largely forgotten.

Author: It is a valid marketing point, nonetheless.

Reviewer 5: I would suggest dropping this point as well because otherwise it looks like a nostalgia project, but in reality it is more than that.

Author: How would something like, "the modern incarnation of BeOS written from scratch" go? I thought BeOS is worth mentioning because we know the roots of other operating systems, and mentioning BeOS adds context to the project.

I can remove it though, if you still think it's not worth mentioning.

> - Haiku offers a POSIX compatible operating system designed from scratch, with a focus on clean, readable, and reusable codebase.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Haiku offers a POSIX compatible operating system designed from scratch, with a focus on a clean, readable, and reusable codebase.
```

> - Haiku offers a POSIX compatible operating system designed from scratch, with no legacy burden that other operating systems suffer from.

Reviewer 2: POSIX in itself is a legacy burden. And BeOS is a second one. That's quite heavy legacy burden.

Author: Can you suggest a better wording, to make it sound more, like easier to port software, because of the POSIX compatibility?

Reviewer 2: Remove the "with no legacy burden that other operating systems suffer from" because this project is about reimplementing a 20 year old OS using a compiler from the same era, and if that's not legacy burden, I don't know what is.

Author: Got it, I'll edit that part. What do you think of adding "clean codebase" instead? Is it accurate enough?

Reviewer 2: Yes, focus on clean, readable and reusable code, and use of a reasonably high level language (C++, even if only C++98, is a large improvement over C for writing an OS, even if Linux Thorvalds wouldn't agree)

> - The Haiku experience does not suffer from fragmentation. All Haiku components are maintained in a single codebase, without having to rely on other teams for core system components. No flame wars between Z12 and Roadcountry supporters, or Leprechauns and Krusaders. We don't curse on the mailing lists as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The Haiku experience does not suffer from fragmentation. All Haiku components are maintained in a single codebase, without having to rely on other teams for core system components. No flame wars between Z12 and Roadcountry supporters, or Leprechauns and Krusaders. We don't curse on the mailing lists either.
```

- Haiku is a GUI-first operating system, unlike most other FOSS systems. The Terminal is still a first-class citizen after booting the system, right there waiting for you.

> - Haiku is the only operating system that completely stays true to the [desktop metaphor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desktop_metaphor). Tracker is the only remaining mainstream spatial desktop manager. If you are looking for an desktop experience close to the Classic Mac OS, Haiku is your guy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Haiku is the only operating system that completely stays true to the [desktop metaphor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desktop_metaphor). Tracker is the only remaining mainstream spatial desktop manager. If you are looking for a desktop experience close to the Classic Mac OS, Haiku is your guy.
```

> - Haiku offers a unique solution for package management, which most Linux distributions seem to suffer from. All Haiku packages are mountable disk images, therefore they do not litter your system with copied files everywhere. Updating and recovering the system is as easy as replacing a single file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Haiku offers a unique solution for package management, which doesn't have some of the problems most Linux distributions seem to suffer from: All Haiku packages are mountable disk images, therefore they do not litter your system with copied files everywhere. Updating and recovering the system is as easy as replacing a single file.
```

- You might find it surprising that we respect the "everything is a file" concept more than other \*nixes.

> If you are looking for more detailed content, Andrew Greimann has written an excellent [article](https://osvoyager.wordpress.com/2018/11/30/what-makes-beos-and-haiku-unique/) (2018) on the unique points of BeOS and Haiku. [Haiku User Guide](https://www.haiku-os.org/docs/userguide/en/contents.html) is an excellent source on the Haiku system itself and its components. probono has written an excellent series of Haiku articles (2019), which can be found [here](https://medium.com/@probonopd/my-first-day-with-haiku-shockingly-good-8930cad4bbb0) as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are looking for more detailed content, Andrew Greimann has written an excellent [article](https://osvoyager.wordpress.com/2018/11/30/what-makes-beos-and-haiku-unique/) (2018) on the unique points of BeOS and Haiku. The [Haiku User Guide](https://www.haiku-os.org/docs/userguide/en/contents.html) is an great source on the Haiku system itself and its components. probono has written a fantastic series of Haiku articles (2019), which can be found [here](https://medium.com/@probonopd/my-first-day-with-haiku-shockingly-good-8930cad4bbb0).
```

## Other Means of Support

> If you are not a developer, but still want to support Haiku, we appreciate any support offer. Haiku [needs](https://www.haiku-os.org/community/getting-involved/) QA people, designers, documenters... you name it. Our website currently doesn't have a maintainer for instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are not a developer, but still want to support Haiku, we appreciate any help you can provide. Haiku [needs](https://www.haiku-os.org/community/getting-involved/) QA people, designers, documentation writers... you name it. Our website currently doesn't have a maintainer for instance.
```

> If you are able to support the project financially, please make a donation. We are looking for means to hire a full-time developer for an extended period of time, but we do not have the financial resources yet to accomplish this goal. Any [donation](https://www.haiku-inc.org/donate/) you make to Haiku, Inc. will help us realize this goal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are able to support the project financially, please make a donation. We are looking for means to hire a full-time developer for an extended period of time, but we do not have the financial resources yet to accomplish this. Any [donation](https://www.haiku-inc.org/donate/) you make to Haiku, Inc. will help us realize this goal.
```

> If you are able to support the project financially, please make a donation. We are looking for means to hire a full-time developer for an extended period of time, but we do not have the financial resources yet to accomplish this goal. Any [donation](https://www.haiku-inc.org/donate/) you make to Haiku, Inc. will help us realize this goal.

Reviewer 2: We have enough money to pay someone for 1 to 2 years, so that's not true. (2 years is already an extended period, I think)

Author: 1 year or 2 year with less-than-average salary without the necessary income to sustain it, is not a wise financial move. From what I've read, I believe Haiku, Inc. members agree on this.

You can also make recurring donations on PayPal and [LiberaPay](https://liberapay.com/haiku.inc/).

## Contact

> If you would like to join us, introduce yourself on the [haiku-development](https://www.freelists.org/list/haiku-development) mailing list, [forums](https://discuss.haiku-os.org) or visit us on IRC [#haiku](irc://chat.freenode.net/haiku) channel. In the meantime, download a [nightly](https://download.haiku-os.org), and spin up a VM, or install it on that spare laptop that has been collecting dust for years. See it for yourself.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you would like to join us, introduce yourself on the [haiku-development](https://www.freelists.org/list/haiku-development) mailing list, [forums](https://discuss.haiku-os.org) or visit us on IRC [#haiku](irc://chat.freenode.net/haiku) channel. In the meantime, download a [nightly](https://download.haiku-os.org), and spin up a VM, or install it on that spare laptop that has been collecting dust for years. Experience Haiku for yourself.
```
